In this lecture we're going to consider how
the velocity of a single robot joint affects
the velocity of the end effector. Here a couple
of animations that show a simple two-linked
planar robot. On the left we see an example
where joint 1 of the robot is varying sinusoidally.
On the right we see an example where joint
2 of the robot is varying sinusoidally. But,
what we're interested in is the relationship
between the velocities of the individual joints
Q1 or Q2 and the velocity of the end effector.
In what we will be able to show is that instantaneously
the velocity of the end effector is the sum
of the end effector velocity components due
to motion of joint 1 and the motion due to joint 2.
Here's the two-linked robot manipulator which
should be very familiar to us now. We showed
in the previous lecture about forward kinematics
how we can write an expression for the x and
y coordinate for the robot end effector. That
is the robot’s end effector pose in two dimensions.
Now if we consider that the joint angles are
now are the function of time, then we can
compute the derivative of x and y with respect
to time and the dot notation here means the
derivative with respect to time. So xdot is
the derivative of x with respect to time.
Q1 dot is the derivative of the joint angle
Q1 with respect to time.
Computing the derivative is fairly straight
forward. It's pretty much introductory differential
calculus and we need to apply the chain rule.
Let's bring the previous equations on to a
fresh page. And here again is the expressions
for the xdot and ydot.
Now in this expressions you notice that there
are a number of Q1dot and Qdot terms. What
we can do is we can factor them out. And that
enables us to write the expression in a very
compact matrix form. If you uncomfortable
with this or don't understand how we got from
the first expression to the matrix form, multiply
out the matrix form. Multiply the 2x2 matrix
by 2x1 vector and convince yourself that it's
the same expression that we started with.
We can now write this in a very succinct form.
The vector xdot and ydot is the velocity of
the robot end effector. The matrix which is
typically denoted by the symbol J is referred
to as a Jacobian matrix. Note that this Jacobian
matrix is a function of the joint angles Q1
and Q2. So what we have here is a linear relationship
between the joint angle velocity, vector Qdot,
which comprises Q1dot and Q2dot and the tip
velocity in Cartesian space xdot and ydot.
The Jacobian matrix that we just introduced
is named after this gentleman. A 19th century
mathematician Carl Gustav Jacob Jacoby. He's
been very familiar with a functional expression
like this, y is a function of x, x is a scalar
and y is a scalar. And then we could write
the derivative of the function x with respect
to x. It's the same as the derivative of y
with respect to x. The Jacobian is simply
the matrix equivalent of the derivative. It's
the derivative of a function whose argument
is a vector and whose result is a vector.
Now those vectors don't have to be the same
length. In this example, x is a vector of
n dimensions and y is a vector of m dimensions.
So the Jacobian as I said is a matrix and
it will be in this case an n by m matrix.
The elements of the matrix are the partial
derivatives of each of the outputs of the
function with respect to each of the inputs to the function. In a nutshell that's what a Jacobian is.
When we talked about kinematics, we introduce
a functional form.
We introduced the function K which operates
on the robot joint angles and returns the
robot pose. Now for the two-link robot that
we're considering now, the joint angles belong
to the two dimensional space of real numbers
and the end effector post also belongs to
the two dimensional space or real numbers.
The joint angle vector Q belongs to the space
of two dimensional real numbers, it's the
set of numbers Q1 and Q2. And the end effector
post belongs to the two dimensional space
of real numbers. That saying that the end
effector post is represented by two real numbers
x and y. The other symbol that we introduced
a moment ago is the spatial velocity. And
we used the Greek letter nu, it looks like
a V and its handy because it is a type of
velocity but it's not just a velocity in the
plain. It also includes rotational velocity,
That becomes really important when we talk about robots that operates on three dimensional space.